# Chapter 1 - Getting Started

## 1.1 - Writing a Simple C++ Program

 - Every C++ program contains one or more functions, one of which must be named **main**.

```cpp
int main()
{
  return 0;
}
```

 - On most systems, the value returned from main is a status indicator.
   - A return value of 0 indicates success.
   - A nonzero return has a meaning that is defiend by the system; usually indicates some kind of error.

### 1.1.1. Compiling and Executing our Program

 - To run using command-line interface, we typically run:

```
$ CC prog.cc
```
 - CC = name of compiler,
 - $ = system prompt,
 - On windows, the compiler generates an executable file named prog1.exe. 
 - On UNIX, compiler tends to generate an executable file named a.out

To execute the executable file:
 - On Windows, run "prog1" or "./prog1".
 - On UNIX, run "a.out" or "./a.out".

### Example
```
g++ -o prog1 main.cpp
```
 - '-o' names the executable file.
   - If this is not named, the executable file becomes either 'a.out' or 'prog1'

## 1.2. A first look at Input/Output
 - Most of the examples in this book uses **iostream** library.
 - Fundamental to the iostream library are two types named **istream** and **ostream**, which represents input and output streams, respectively.

**Standard Input and Output Objects**

 - To handle input, we use an object of type **istream**, named cin.
   - also known as **standard input**.

 - For output, we use an **ostream** object, named cout. 
   - also known as **standard output**.

 - **cerr**, also referred as standard error, is for warning and error messages.

 - **clog** is for general information about the execution of the program.

### Example:
simpleIOProg.cpp
```cpp
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
  std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;
  int v1 = 0, v2 = 0;
  std::cin >> v1 >> v2;
  std::cout << "The sum of " << v1 << " and " << v2 << " is " << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```

**Writing to Stream**
```cpp
std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;
```
 - The << operator takes two operands: the left-hand operand must be an ostream object; the right-hand operands is a value to print.
 - The result of the output operator is the left-hand operand; the ostream object.

  - Our line above is equivalent to:

```cpp
(std::cout << "Enter two numbers:") << std::endl;
```

Alternatively, this is equivalent to:
```cpp
std::cout << "Enter two numbers:";
std::cout << std:endl;
```

 - The first output operator prints a messages.
 - The second operator prints endl, which is a special value called a **manipulator**.
   - This has the effect of ending the current line and flushing the buffer associated with that device.

**Using Names from Standard Library**
 - Why do we use std::cout instead of cout? 
 - Prefix std:: indicates cout is defiend inside the namespace, std.

## 1.3. Comments
 - Use // or /* .. */

## 1.4. Flow of Control
### 1.4.1. While statement
```cpp
int sum = 0, val = 1;
while(val <= 10){
  sum += val;
  ++val;
}
```

### 1.4.2. For Statement 
 - same as java
```cpp
for(int val = 1; val <= 10; ++val){
  sum += val;
  ...
}
```

### 1.4.3. Reading an unknown number of inputs
```cpp
while(std::cin >> value)
  sum += value;
```
 - We will give the input '3 4 5 6', and it will calculate the sum of these 4 numbers.

**Entering end-of-file from keyboard**
 - In windows, ctrl+z -> enter
 - In UNIX, ctrl+d

## 1.4.4 If Statement

```cpp
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
  int currVal = 0, val = 0;
  //Read first number and ensure we have data to process.
  if(std::cin >> currVal){
    ....
    while(std::cin >> val){ // Read remaining numbers.a
      ...
    }
  }
  return 0;
}
```

## 1.5. Introducing Classes
 - We need to define a data structure to represent our transaction data.

### 1.5.1. Sales_item class

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include "Sales_item.h"
int main()
{
  Sales_item book;
  std::cin >> book;
  std::cout << book << std:endl;
  return 0; 
}
```
```
Input:
0-201-70353-X 4 24.99 (parameters for Sales_Item)
Output:
0-201-70353-X 4 99.96 24.99 
```

 - 此程序以两个#include指令开始：
   - 包含来自标准库的头文件时，应该用尖括号（<>）包围头文件名。
   - 对于不属于标准的头文件，则用双引号（""）包围。

## 1.5.2. 初识成员函数

```
item1.isbn()
```
 - 在此，isbn是**成员函数（member function）**，有时候也被称为**方法（method）**。
 - **点运算法(.)**
 - **参数（argument）**
 

## 1.6. BookStore Program
TODO: Come bac