# Chapter 2: Variables and Basic Types

### 2.2.1. Arithmetic Types

 - 2 categories: integral types (incl character and boolean types) and floating-point types

 - Types: 
   - bool, char, wchar_t, char16_t, char32_t, short, int, long, long long, float, double, long double.

   - char type is guaranteed to be big enough to hold numeric values corresponding to the characters in the machine's **basic** character set.
   - wchar_t type is guaranteed to be large enough to hold any character in the machine's **largest** extended cahracter set.
   - char16_t and char32_t are intended for Unicode characters.
   - numerical types based on integer range: short <= int <= long <= long long

**Signed and Unsigned Types**

 - except for bool and character, the integral types may be signed or unsigned.
 - **signed** represent negative or positive numbers (including 0)
 - **unsigned** represent only values greater than or equal to zero.

 - There are two types of char; signed and unsigned char. The default char is one of these two, and which one it is depends on the compiler.

### 2.1.2. Type Conversion

```cpp
bool b = 42;  // b is true
int i = b;    // i has value 1
i = 3.14;     // i has value 3
double pi = i; // pi has value 3.0.
unsigned char c = -1; // assume 8-bit chars, c has value 255.
signed char c2 = 256; // assume 8-bit chars, the value of c2 is undefined.
```
```cpp
int i = 24;
if(i) // condition will evaluate as true
  i = 0;
```

**Character and Character String Literals:**

 - Compiler appends a null character ('\\0') to every string literal.
 - Thus, the actual size of a string literal is one more than its apparent size.
 - Eg: 'A' represents a single character, but string literal "A" represents an array of two characters; letter 'A' and null character.

**Escape Sequences**

 - We can write a generalized escape sequence, which is \x followed by one or more hexidecimal digits or a \ followed by one, two or three octal digits.

 For example:
 ```
 \115 ('M')
 \x4d ('M')
 ```
 ```cpp
 std::cout << "Hi \x4dO\115!\n"
;
// print: Hi MOM!!(newline)
```

## 2.2. Variables

### 2.2.1. Variable Definitions

 - Each name has a type and name of variable. A definition may (optionally) provide initial value.

```cpp
int sum = 0, value, units_sold = 0; // sum, value and units_sold have type int. sum and units_sold are initialized to 0.
Sales_item item;
std::string book("abc");
```
 - Definition of book uses **std::string** library type. Similar to iostream, string is defined in namespace **std**. 

**List Initialization**

We can use any of the following 4 ways to define an int variable name units_sold:

```cpp
int units_sold = 0;
int units_sold = {0};
int units_sold{0};
int units_sold(0);
```

 - The use of curly braces is a new standard. 
 - Note that compiler will not let us initialize variables of build-in type if initializer might lead to loss of information: For example:

```cpp
long double ld = 3.1415926536;
int a{ld}, b = {ld}; // ERROR: loss of information
int c(ld), d = ld; // OK: but value will be truncated/loss of information
```

**Default Initialization**

 - When we define a variable without an initializer, the variable is **default initialized**. 
 - The value of a **build-in type** that is not explicitly initialized depends on where it is defined. 
   - If outside any function body, it's initialized to zero (with 1 exception; will be covered later)
   - If inside any function body, it's initialized to undefined; thus, is an error to copy or access.
 - For **custom classes**, it depends on the class itself. 
   - Most classes let us define objects with explicit initializers.
   - Eg. uninitialized string is an empty string.

# 2.2.2. Variable Declarations and Definitions

 - **Separate Compilation** lets us split our program into several files, each of which can be compiled independently.
   - When we separate the program into multiple files, we need a way to share the code across the files.
   - For example, code defined in one file may need to use a variable in another file, in the form of a library. Eg: std::cout.
   - To support separate compilation, C++ **distinguishes betweeen** declaration and definition.
 - A **declaration** makes a name known to the program. 
   - A file that wants to use a name defined elsewhere includes a declaration for that name.
   - Specifies **type** and **name** 
 - A **definition** creates the associated entity.
   - Is a declaration. In addition, also **allocates storage and may provide initial value**.
 - We use **extern** to obtain a declaraction that is not also a definition.

```cpp
extern int i; // declares but does not define i
int j; // declares and defines j
```

 - We can provide an initialize value to an extern variable, but doing so **overrides** the extern.

```cpp
extern double pi = 3.1416; // definition
```

 - *It is an error to provide an initializer on an extern inside a function.*

 - Note that **Variables must be defined exactly once, but can be declared many tiems.**

**Final Note**

 - To use the same variable in multiple files, we must **define that variable in one (and only one) file.**
 - Other files that use that variable must **declare, but not define** that variable.

### 2.2.3. Identifiers

 - Identifiers must **begin with either a letter or an underscore**, is **case-sensitive**.

**Conventions**

 - Variable names are normally lowercase; eg. index.
 - Class names usually begin with uppercase letter; eg. Sales_item
 - Identifiers with multiple words should visually distinguish each word; eg. student_loan or studentLoan, NOT studentloan.

 ### 2.2.4. Scope of a name

 - A **scope** is a part of the program in which a name has a particular meaning.
   - Most scopes in C++ are delimited by curly braces.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
int reused = 42;

int main()
{
  int unique = 0;
  std::cout << reused << " " << unique << std::endl;  // out 1: prints 42 0
  int reused = 0; // new, local object named reused, hides global reused.
  std::cout << reused << " " << unique << std::endl;  // out 2: prints 0 0
  std::cout << ::reused << " " << unique << std::endl;  // explicitly requests global scope; out 3: prints 42 0
  return 0;
}
```
 - output #3 uses the scope operator to override the default scoping rules.
   - For more information, you can check out: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/scope-resolution-operator-in-c/

# 2.3. Compound Types

 - A **compound type** is type that is defined in terms of another type.
 - C++ hash several compount types; **references and pointers**.

### 2.3.1. References

 - A **reference** defines an alterantive name for an object; "refers to" another type.
 - We define a reference type by writing a declaractor of the form **\&d**, where d is the name being declared.

```cpp
int ival = 1024;
int &refVal = ival; // refVal refers to (is another name for) ival
int &refVal2; // ERROR: a reference must be initialized.
```

 - When we **initialize** a variable, the value of the initializer is copied into the object we are creating. 
 - However, when we **define a reference**, instead of copying the initializer's value, we **bind the reference to its initializer**. 
 - Once initialized, a reference remains bound to its initial object; there is **no way to rebind** a reference to refer to a different object.
   - Because **references must/can only be initialized**.

**A Reference is an Alias**

 - Note: A reference is NOT an object, instead, it's just another name for an already existing object.
 - **After a reference has been defined, all operations on that reference are actually operations on the object to which the reference is bound:**
   - When we assign to a reference, fetch value of a reference or use a reference as an initializer, we are really using the object to which the reference is bound.

```cpp
refVal = 2;
int ii = refVal;
int &refVal3 = refVal; // refVal3 is bound to which refVal is bound (ival)
int i = refVal; // initializes i to same value as ival.
```

 - Because references are not objects, we **cannot define a reference to a reference**.
   - By this, I think it means that when we define refA to a refB (refA = refB), we are defining it with the object that refB; and not refB itself.

 - a reference **must bound only to an object**, not a literal.

```cpp
int &refVal4 = 10; // ERROR: initializer must be an object.
double dval = 3.14;
int &refVal5 = dval; // ERROR: initializer must be an int object
```
### 2.3.2. Pointers

 - A **pointer** is a compound type that "points to" another type.
 - Like references, pointers are used for indirect access to other objects.
 - Unlike references, pointer is an object, can be assigned and copied, can be reassigned and need not be initialized when defined.
 - Like other built-in types, pointers defined at block scope have undefined value if they are not initialized.
 - We write pointer in the form of \*d; eg. int *ip1; double *d2;

**Taking the address of an object**

 - A pointer holds the address of another object. 
 - We get the address of an object by using the address-of operator (the \& operator):
```cpp
int ival = 42;
int *p = &ival; // p holds the address of ival; p is a pointer to ival.
```

 - We cannot define pointer to reference, because reference is not an object.

```cpp
double dval;
double *pd = &dval; // OK: initializer is the address of a double
double *pd2 = pd; // OK: initializer is a pointer to double
int *pi = pd; // ERROR: types of pi and pd differ
pi = &dval; // ERROR: assigngin the address of a double to a pointer to int.
```
 - As shown above, the types must match.

**Pointer Value**

 - The value stored in a pointer can be in one of four states:
  1. It can point to an object.
  2. It can point to the location just immediately past the end of an object.
  3. It can be a null pointer, indicating that it is not bound to any object.
  4. It can be invalid; values other than the preceding three are invalid.

 - It is an **ERROR to try to access or copy an invalid pointer**

**Using a pointer to access an object**

 - When a pointer points to an object, we can use the **dereference operator(\*) to access that object**
 - Dereferencing a pointer yields the object to which the pointer points to. 
 - We can assign to that object by assigning to the result of the dereference.

```cpp
int ival = 42;
int *p = &ival; // p holds the address of ival; p is a pointer to ival.
cout << *p // Dereferenced. * yields the object to which p points; prints 42. 
*p = 0; // Because * yields the object, we assign a new value to ival through p.
cout << *p; // prints 0.
```
 - Note that we can only dereference a valid pointer that points to an object.

**Clearing up Confusion: Some symbols have Multiple Meanings**

```cpp
int i = 42;
int &r = i; // % follows a type and is part of a declaration; r is i.
int *p; // * follows a type and is part of a declaration; p is a pointer.
p = &i; // & is used in an expression as the address-of operator;
*p = i; // * is used in an express as the dereference operator; i = i.
int &r2 = *p; // & is part of the declaraction; * is the dereference operator.
```

**Null Pointers**

 - A **null pointer** does not point to any object. 
 - Code can check whether a pointer is null before attempting to use it.

```cpp
int *p1 = nullptr;
int *p2 = 0;
int *p3 = NULL; 
```

 - **nullptr** is a literal that has a special type that can be converted to **any other pointer type**
 - Literal 0 can also be used to create null pointer.
   - However, it's illegal to assign an int variable to a pointer, even if the variable's value is 0.
 - Older programs sometimes use a **preprocessor variable** named NULL, which the cstdlib header defines as 0; 
   - **But modern C++ programs should avoid this!**

```cpp
int zero = 0;
int *pi = zero; // ERROR: canot assign int to pointer
```

**Advice: Initialize all Pointers**

 - Uninitialized pointers are a **common source of run-time errors**. 
 - Uninitialized pointers almost always result in run-time crash, but is **surprisingly difficult to debug**.
 - It is advised to **always initialize pointers**. If possible, to an object, else, initialize as a null pointer (via nullptr or 0).
   - That way, the program can detect that the pointer does not point to an object.

**Assignment and Pointers**

```cpp
int i = 42;
int *pi = 0; // p1 is a null pointer
int *pi2 = &i; // p2 holds address of i
int *pi3; // p3 is uninitialized.
pi3 = pi2; // pi1 and pi2 address same object (i)
pi2 = 0; // pi2 now address no object; is null pointer.
pi = &ival; // address in pi is changed, pi now points to ival.
*pi = 0; // value in ival (cuz pi points to ival) has changed.
```

**Using pointer as boolean**

```cpp
int *pi = 0;
int *pi2 = &ival;

if(pi) // pi has value 0, thus, condition is false
  // ....
if(pi2) // pi2 points to ival, thus, condition is true
  // ...
```

**void \* pointer**

 - The type **void\*** is a special pointer type that can hold the address of any object.
 - It holds an address (like a pointer), but the **type of the object** at the address is **unknown**

```cpp
double obj = 3.14, *pd = &obj; // OK: void* can hold address value of any data pointer type
void *pv = &obj;
pv = pd; // void pointer can be assigned to another void pointer.
```

 - There are a limited number of things a void\*pointer can do:
   - compare to another pointer
   - pass it to or return it from a functino
   - assign it to another void\* pointer.
 - Note that we **cannot use void\* to operate on the object is addresses**; because we don't know what object's type.

### 2.3.3. Understanding Compound Type Declarations

```cpp
int* p // legal, but might be misleading
int* p1, p2; // p1 is a pointer, p2 is an int
```

**Pointer to Pointers**

 - We indicate each pointer level by its own.
   - That is, we write ** for pointer to pointer, and *** for pointer to a pointer to a pointer; and so forth.

```cpp
int ival = 1024;
int *pi = &ival; // pi points to ival
int **ppi = &pi; // ppi points to a pointer to an int.
cout << "The value of ival\n" 
      << "direct value: " << ival << "\n"
      << "indirect value: " << *pi << "\n"
      << "doubly indirect value: " << **ppi 
      << endl;
/* 
prints:
The value of ival
direct value: 1024
indirect value: 1024
doubly indirect value: 1024
*/
```

 - [ppi] -> [pi] -> [ival(1024)]

**References to Pointers**

```cpp
int i = 42;
int *p; // p is a pointer to int
int *&r = p; // r is a reference to the pointer p (explained later)
r = &i; // r refers to a pointer; assigning &i to r makes p point to i; Equivalent to p = &i;
*r = 0; // dereferencing r yields i, the object to which which p points; changes i to 0.
```
**How to Interpret int *&r?**
 - The easiest is to read the definition from right to left.
   - The symbol closest to the name of the variable (in this case, the & in &r), is the one that has the most immediate effect on the variable's type.
   - The rest of the declarator determines the type to which r refers.
 - I think of it as "int* &r".
   - &r is a reference.
   - It refers to an int pointer.

## 2.4. const Qualifier

```cpp
const int bufSize = 512;
const int i = get_size(); // OK
const int j; // ERROR: must be initialized.
int k = i; // OK. value of i is copied to k. 
```

**By Default, const Objects are local to a file**

 - When we use const, the compiler usually rpelaces the variable with its corresponding value during compilation.
 - Thus, when we split a program into multiple files, every file that uses the const must have access to its initializer.
 - And to see the initializer, the variable must be defined in every file that wnats to use the variable's value.
 - To support this usage, yet avoid multiple definitions of the same variable, const variables are defined as **local to the file**.
 - **When we define a const with the same name in multiple files, it is as if we had written definitions for separate variables in each file**.

**What if we have a const variable that we want to share across multiple files?**
 - To define a single instance of a const variable, we use the keyword **extern** on both its definition and declaration.

```cpp
// file_1.cc:
extern const int bufSize = fcn();

// file_1.h:
extern const int bufSize;
```

 - In this program, file_1.cc defines and initializes bufSize. Because this declaration includes an initializer, it is a definition.
 - However, because bufSize is a const, we must specify extern in order for bufSize to be used in other files.
 - The declaration in file_1.h is also extern. In this case, the extern signifies that bufSize is not local to this file and that its definition will occur elsewhere.

### 2.4.1. References to const

```cpp
const int ci = 1024;
const int &r1 = ci; // OK
r1 = 24; // ERROR: r1 is reference to a const
int &r2 = ci; // ERROR: non-const reference to a const object
```

**Assigning non-const obj to const obj**

 - Previously, we said there are two exceptions to the rule that the type of a reference must match the type fo the object it refers to. The first exception is that **we can initialize a reference to const from any expression that can be converted to the type of reference**.

```cpp
int i = 42;
const int &r1 = i; // OK: we can bind a const int& to a plain int object.
const int &r2 = 42; // OK
const int &r3 = r1 * 2; // OK
int &r4 = r1; // r4 is plain, non const reference.
```

 - Under the hood, we use a temporary object. For example, when we see:

```cpp
double dval = 3.14;
const int &ri = dval;
```

The compiler actually converts it to:

```cpp
const int temp = dval;  // create a temporary object based on reference type.
const int &ri = temp;   // bind ri to that temporary
```

**A reference to const May refer to an Object that is not const**

```cpp 
int i = 42;
int &r1 = i; // ri is bound to i
const int &r2 = i; // r2 is bound to i; but cannot be used to change i.
r1 = 0; // r1 is nto const; i is set to 0
r2 = 0; // ERROR: r2 is a reference to const. Changing const is illegal.
```

### 2.4.2. Pointers and const

 - Similar to references, we can store address of a const object only in a pointer to const:

```cpp
const double pi = 3.14;
double *ptr = &pi; // ERROR: ptr is a plain pointer
const double *cptr = &pi; // OK
*cptr = 42; // ERROR: can't assign to *cptr cuz const.
```

 - Similar to reference to const, a pointer to const means we cannot change the value pointed by the pointer.

```cpp
double dval = 3.14;
const double *cptr = &dval; // OK, but we cannot change dval through cptr
```

**const Pointers**

 - Unlike references, pointers are object. Therefore, **Pointers themselves can be constant**.
   - A const Pointer means once initialized wiht a value, it cannot be changed.
   - We indicate a const pointer by putting const after the \*.

```cpp
int errNum = 0;
int *const currErr = &errNum;  // curErr will ALWAYS point to errNum.
const double pi = 3.14159;
const double *const pip = &pi;
```

 - Note that a const pointer does not indicate whether the point-to object is const or not.

```cpp
*pip = 2.72; // ERROR: pip is a pointer to const
*curErr = 0; // OK: since errNum is not const.
```

### 2.4.3. Top-Level const

 - We use **top-level const** to indicate that the pointer itself is a const.
 - When a pointer can point to a const object, we refer to that const as a **low-level const**.

```cpp
int i = 0;
int *const p1 = &i; // cannot change p1; const is top-level
const int ci = 42; // cannot change ci; const is top-level
const int *p2 = &ci; // change change p2; const is low-level
const int *const p3 = p2; // both top and low level const
```

### 2.4.4. constexpr and Constant Expressions

 - A **constant expression** is an express whose value cannot change and that can be evaluated at compile time.
 - A literal is a constant expression.
 - A const object that is initialized from a constant expression is also a constant expression.

```cpp
const int max_files = 20; // max_files is a constant expression
const int limit = max_files + 1; // limit is a constant expression
int staff_size = 27; // staff-size is NOT a constant expression
const int sz = get_size(); // sz is NOT a constant expression
``` 
 - Although staff_size is initialized from a literal, it is **not a constant expression because it is a plain int**, not a const int.
 - Even though sz is a const, the value of its initializer is not known until run time. Hence, sz is NOT a constant expression.

**constexpr variables**

 - In a large system, it can be difficult to determine for certain that an initializer is a constant expression.
 - We can use **constexpr** to ensure our variable is initialized by constant expressions:

```cpp
constexpr int mf = 20;
constexpr int limit = mf + 1;
constexpr int sz = size(); // OK, ONLY if size is a constexpr function
```

**Literal Types**

 - Because a constant expression is one that can be evaluated at compile time, we can **only use literal types in a constexpr declaration.**
   - Because they are simple enough to have literal values.
   - Arithmetic, reference and pointer types are literal types.
   - But Sales_item class and library IO and string types are NOT literal types.

**constexpr pointers and references**

 - The objects we use to initialize a constantexpr pointer or reference is strictly limited too.
 - **Literals and Objects that remains at a fixed address are okay.**
   - But variables defined in a function are not stored at a fixed address, thus, cannot use constexpr.

```cpp
constexpr int *np = nullptr; // np is a constant pointer to null pointer
int j = 0;
constexpr int i = 42;

// i and j must be defined outside any function
constexpr const int *p = &i; // p is a constant pointer to a constant int.
constexpr int *p1 = &j; // p1 is a constant pointer to an int.
```

## 2.5. 处理类型

### 2.5.1. 类型别名（Type Alias）

 - 类型别名是某种类型的同义词。
 - 使用类型别名有很多好处，他让复杂的类型名字变得简单了，易于理解和使用，还有助于程序员清楚地知道使用该类型的真正目的。
 - 有两种方法可用于定义类型别

 1. 传统方法是使用关键词**typedef**：
 ```cpp
typedef double wages; wages是double的同义词
typedef wages base, *p；base是double的同义词，p是double*的同义词。
 ```
 - 2. 使用别名声明（alias declaration）来定义类型的别名，比如：
```cpp
using SI = Sales_item; // SI 是Sales_item 的同义词
```
 - 只要是类型的名字能出现的地方，就能使用类型别名：
 ```cpp
 wages hourly, weekly; // 等价于double hourly, weekly;
 SI item；    // 等价于Sales_item item
 ```

### 指针、常量和类型别名

```cpp
typedef char *pstring;
const pstring cstr = 0; // cstr是指向char的常量指针（char constant pointer)
const pstring *ps; // ps是一个指针，他的对象是指向char的常量指针 (pointer to char constant pointer)
```

```
const pstring cstr = 0;
VS
const char *cstr = 0;
```

 - 注意：const pstring cstr 跟 const char *cstr **不是**同样的东西
   - 前者(const pstring cstr) 是一个指向char的常量指针(constant pointer)
   - 而后者(const char *cstr) 是一个指向const char的指针 (pointer)








